[Music]
welcome to a new edition of system
update I'm Glenn Greenwald this episode
focuses on several of the under
discussed in under explored
ramifications of the choices we're
collectively making in response to the
corona virus pandemic how do we protect
civil liberties and political rights
while at the same time vesting powers
necessary power in governments and
corporations in order to manage the
pandemic what are the enduring social
cultural political and psychological
consequences ones that will endure even
after this pandemic is brought under
control from being in isolation and
segregated from one another and
quarantine and socially distancing and
then finally what is the role that
animal agriculture and industrial
factory farms the way that we feed
ourselves as a planet of almost eight
billion people have to do with the
outbreak of highly new and frightening
pathogens joining me to explore these
topics are three guests the first is NSA
whistleblower and president of the board
of the freedom of the press foundation
Edward Snowden the second is the
contributing writer at McLean's magazine
in Canada Andrei Domus who writes and
thinks about these topics in very
thought-provoking
and insightful ways and then the third
is Cassie King a very courageous young
and experienced investigator and
activist with the animal rights group
direct action everywhere who has been
inside of many of the largest and most
disease ridden factory farms it seems
like much more time than this but it's
only been a few weeks since most of us
have been in isolation and Quarantine
the first European country to really
drown in this crisis was Italy and the
Italian government ordered a nationwide
lockdown
only on March 9 just about exactly one
month ago and it was only after that
that other countries in Western Europe
North America such as United States and
Canada and in Latin America began doing
the same so it's only been a matter of a
few weeks that we all been in this
isolation and all been segregated from
one another and in that time we've seen
a very wide array of responses from
different states for how to deal with
this pandemic everything ranging from
educational campaigns designed to
encourage voluntary behavior of social
distancing to the implementation of new
surveillance systems in order to enable
contact tracing of the type that we saw
in South Korea to police enforce
quarantines where people can be fined or
even arrested for leaving their homes
without permission or without
justification under the law things that
we're seeing not only in places like
Singapore but also the United States and
throughout Latin America and Europe and
then finally the ultimate expression of
authoritarianism in a Hungary a member
of the EU state that quickly seized on
this crisis in order to essentially turn
itself into despotism and to rule by
emergency decree by a strongman in the
meantime there are billions of people on
the planet who have had their lives
radically and suddenly disrupted in
fundamental ways obviously just having
to be in our homes without being able to
go out the fear of a scary and unknown
new virus and the looming threat of
sustained economic crises perhaps even a
great depression has upended all of our
lives in ways that just three months ago
were unthinkable and it's for cisely for
that reason precisely because of that
that it is imperative that we think very
hard very rationally very deliberatively
and very freely about the choices that
were now making in terms of what powers
do we want to invest in governments what
powers do we want to invest do we want
invest in corporations because these
choices have
profound and long-lasting effects about
the society that we're going to be and
in thinking about those questions I
think three points are imperative the
first is that it is crucial that we all
collectively vigilantly create the space
and safeguard the space in which we can
have free debates on these questions in
which Pyatt EES can be challenged and
orthodoxies questioned to really learn
that lesson I think that we can look at
an event that was maybe not as
cataclysmic as this pandemic but
certainly was traumatic which most of us
lived through which was the attack of
September 11th and 2001 in which the
immediate aftermath brought a climate
based on fear in which very little
dissent was tolerated it was immediately
stigmatized or worse one way that you
can see that is by looking at the now
infamous Patriot Act which was enacted
on October 25th 2001 so just six weeks
after the September 11th attack it
passed the Senate by a vote of 98 to 1
just one senator Democrat Democratic
Senator Russ Feingold from Wisconsin was
willing to stand up on the Senate floor
and vote against it on the grounds that
it vested radical and excessive
surveillance and detention powers in the
US government even more illustrative is
the authorization to use military force
which empowered George Bush and the bush
cheney administration to use violence
military force and war against anybody
that they deemed in their unilateral and
sole discretion to be responsible in any
way for the 9/11 attacks it passed on
September 14 2001 roughly 72 hours after
the attack and it passed the Senate by a
vote of 98 to 0 so nobody willing to
stand up and oppose it and it passed the
Congress the House of Representatives by
a vote of 422 one just one lone member
of Congress the courageous Barbara Lee
of California stood up on the floor of
the house and warned that this
authorization would lead to endless war
our ranking member and my friend for
yielding mr. speaker members I rise
today really with a very heavy heart one
that is filled with sorrow for the
families and the loved ones who were
killed and injured this week only the
most foolish and the most callous would
not understand the grief that has really
gripped our people and millions across
the world this unspeakable act on the
United States has really reformed forced
me however to rely on my moral compass
my conscience and my God for direction
September 11th changed the world our
deepest fear is now haunt us yet I am
convinced that military action will not
prevent further acts of international
terrorism against the United States this
is a very complex and complicated matter
now this resolution will pass although
we all know that the president can wage
a war even without it however difficult
this vote maybe some of us must urge the
use of restraint our country is in a
state of mourning some of us must say
let's step back for a moment let's just
pause just for a minute and think
through the implications of our actions
today so that this does not spiral out
of control
now I have agonized over this vote but I
came to grips with it today and I came
to grips with opposing this resolution
during the very painful
yet very beautiful memorial service as a
member of the clergy so eloquently said
as we act let us not become the evil
that we deplore thank you and I yield
the balance of my time
and she congresswoman Lee was so
stigmatized so demonized for her lone
vote against that authorization that she
received a tidal wave of very credible
death threats and was forced to use
state provided security for months in
order to prevent any attacks on her that
was the climate that quickly emerged in
the wake of 9/11 and now we know that
congresswoman Lee was correct in warning
that the AUMF would lead to years and
years of endless war we know that russ
feingold was correct to stand up and
warned of the dangers of the patriot act
and yet there was so little dissent and
debate permissible because of the
climate of fear that arose that very
little deliberation or rational
discussion or rational debate was
possible I think it's imperative that we
avoid that mistake there was a column by
the Israeli writer you won't know re in
the Financial Times on March 20th which
underscored this point very potently he
wrote quote the decisions people and
governments take in the next few weeks
will probably shape the world for years
to come
they will shape not just our healthcare
systems but also our economy politics
and culture we should also take into
account the long-term consequences of
our action when choosing between
alternatives we should ask ourselves not
only how to overcome the immediate
threat but also what kind of world will
we inhabit once the storm passes yes the
storm will pass humankind will survive
most of us will still be alive but we
will inhabit a very different world it's
precisely for that reason that the
decisions that we're now making are
genuinely momentous are genuinely
profound that no matter where you fall
on the spectrum of how these competing
values ought to be calibrated and
navigated it's in all of our interest
not to demonize or stigmatize those who
question prevailing orthodoxies because
we see how often those prevailing
orthodoxies are raw
but to safeguard their right to do that
so we're having rational debate rather
than fear driven debate about the kinds
of decisions that we're making the
second point I think it's vital to
recognize is that there really is no
such thing in a crisis as temporary
powers vested in power centers we can
say that we're in favor of things like
enhanced surveillance authorities or
enhance police power to enforce
quarantine or the ability of governments
and corporations to more comprehensively
track what it is that we're doing just
until the crisis blows over but the
reality is much different it's almost
inevitable that powers that are vested
in the hands of corporations and
governments in the name of the temporary
emergency end up being anything but
temporary they end up being permanent
and they expand rather than contract
even once that original crisis is over
again I think probably the best example
are the measures adopted in the wake of
9/11 beginning with the Patriot Act
which was recognized even while the
World Trade Center was still in its
rubble as being genuinely radical as
threatening and menacing as any piece of
legislation seen in the United States in
decades and yet the answer given by
those who are advocates of its enactment
was oh don't worry we're putting into
the bill a sunset provisions who to
ensure that it will expire after a few
years once the threat of Muslim
terrorism has been managed and it will
only be a temporary part of our
political system not anything
permanently new or radical perhaps
illustrating this mentality in its
purest distillation was a nova October
14 2001 New York Times and vote exactly
that argument writing quote the House of
Representatives approved legislation
today to give the government broad new
powers for the wiretapping surveillance
and investigation of terrorism suspects
but in recognition of many lawmakers
fears of the potential for government
overreaching and abuse the house
included a five-year limit after which
many of those powers
would expire and yet here we are almost
20 years later and none of the powers of
the Patriot Act have expired each time
the Patriot Act comes up for
reauthorization not only does it pass it
passes overwhelmingly by votes in the
Senate of 91 to 9 or 90 to 8 and not
only has it not been rescinded even
attempts to reform it are rejected and
if anything the Patriot Act has expanded
radically beyond its original
interpretation to something much broader
and darker and yet it's still impossible
to retract it nobody really talks
anymore about rescinding the Patriot Act
it's become a permanent part of the
fabric of American life the same is true
of the authorization to use military
force which was enacted in the wake of
9/11 on the grounds that it would enable
the president to eradicate those who
were responsible for the 9/11 attack and
yet 19 years later President Bush and
then President Obama and now President
Trump still invoke it as purported legal
authority to bomb or otherwise use
military violence against groups that
didn't even exist at the time of the
9/11 attacks let alone bear
responsibility for it a nother very
potent example is the defense production
Act of 1950 which many have urged
President Trump to invoke more
prolifically in response to this crisis
that was a bill that was passed under
the Truman administration that allowed
us presidents essentially to commandeer
industry and force it to work for the
National Defense of the United States
and the justification at the time was it
was necessary to win the Korean War to
force industry not to produce its own
products for profit but to produce
weapons and steel and other materials to
enable the u.s. to win the war yet here
we are 70 years later and not only is
that law still very much in place and
not only our people urging President
Trump to invoke it but the meaning and
reach and scope of that law have wildly
expanded so that national defense now
means not just things like winning wars
but
in enabling the government to address
public health crises that is the reality
of powers that we acquiesce to now on a
temporary basis they're likely to be
permanent and they're likely to expand
far beyond their original expression
again mihari warns of this in a very
clear way in the Financial Times article
he wrote where he writes quote you could
of course make the case for biometric
surveillance as a temporary measure
taken during a state of emergency it
would go away once the emergency is over
but temporary measures have a nasty
habit about lasting emergencies
especially as there is always a new
emergency lurking on the horizon my home
country of Israel for example declared a
state of emergency during its 1948 war
of independence which justified a range
of temporary measures from press
censorship and land confiscation to
special regulations from making put in I
kid you not he goes on to note of course
that 72 years later those emergency
temporary decrees are still very much in
place and they now empower the Israeli
government to do far more than even
their original advocates ever envisioned
it's one thing to defend and advocate
new powers in the hands of governments
and corporations in the name of fighting
this pandemic but it's crucial to be
realistic about it which means that we
must recognize that those powers even if
you want them to be temporary are highly
unlikely to be that the last point I
think is very important to start
thinking about and to acknowledge are
they serious and profound cultural
social psychological and political
changes that are being fostered by a lot
of the measures including ones in which
were voluntarily engaging in that are
almost certain to endure once this
pandemic is over if you think about it
the fact that we are all physically
separated from one another is itself a
momentous change and not only are we
physically separated from one another
but we're being trained to regard each
other not as fellow citizens with whom
we can
necked and with whom we can work in
pursuit of common goals but we're being
trained to regard one another as threats
as the vectors of a fatal disease who
are to be avoided and what that means is
that we see power centers strengthening
rapidly as a result of this pandemic
states gaining previously unthinkable
powers corporations watching their
smaller competitors go out of business
as a result of the economic standstill
while the Giants like Amazon and Walmart
become even bigger and we've lost our
ability to unite to do any kind of
meaningful protest because we can't even
gather together on the street with one
another because we're all segregated
physically from one another we saw this
very disturbingly in the case of the
attempt by of handful of Amazon
warehouse workers to organize a strike
in Amazon and fired the organizer of
that strike and its spokesman former
white how a bomb the White House press
secretary Jay Carney justified the
firing on the grounds that by organizing
a protest he violated social distancing
guidelines and endangered the health of
other Amazon workers including the ones
who voluntarily participated in the
protests were already seeing protests
being pathologized being criminalized on
top of the difficulty of joining
together when we're all in physical
isolation from one another here in
Brazil when people want to protest as
they often do increasingly the unhinged
and sociopathic response of the bull
snarl government to the corona virus
pandemic they go to their windows pick
up pots and pans and spoons and bang
with the spoons on those pots and pans
it's a traditional form of
latin-american protest it creates a lot
of noise but under the circumstances
it's not very menacing since the
government knows none of them can go out
onto the street and gather together and
protest and March that is creating a
very meaningful imbalance between power
centers which are strengthening and we
the citizenry which are weakening even
to the point of physically weakening by
being confined to our homes
invented from engaging in our normal
exercise regimen the mental health costs
that come with it as well I think it's a
crucial critical that we begin to think
very deeply and very clearly about what
these effects are likely to be and
related to that is the question of what
is the animal agriculture industry's
role in spawning a lot of these new
never-before-seen pathogens we obviously
don't know for certain what the origin
what the genesis of Cova 19 is there's
certainly theories that it leaped from
animals to humans that it's a Tzadik
virus as we've seen so many others of
that kind we don't know for certain but
what we do know is that we in the West
love to deride and condemn and mock what
we regard as Asian agricultural
practices people are blaming wet markets
in which animals are killed on the spot
or the consumption of animals that we in
the West don't consume such as bats or
snakes or dogs when in reality
industrial agriculture in the West
especially in the United States is a
festering ground for disease and
pathogens and viruses not just the way
that they enter our body through food
consumption but the way that the waste
is dumped in our communities and I think
it's well past time that we begin to
think about what the effect is of
industrial agriculture in creating an
type of antibiotic resistant bacteria
and in introducing new viruses and
pathogens into the human species so the
main point the overarching point of this
episode for me is that wherever you fall
on the political or ideological spectrum
however you think these competing values
should be balanced and navigated and
calibrated at a time of what obviously
is a true crisis which is the corona
virus pandemic I think it is absolutely
imperative that we work to ensure that
not just ourselves but our fellow
citizens have the ability to question
orthodoxies and to ask what the
long-term ramifications are or even the
midterm ramifications are a lot of these
measures
we've already seen social media sites
like Facebook and Google and Twitter
prohibiting certain arguments from being
made on the grounds that they're
unscientific and there's a part of all
of us certainly me that is relieved that
the president of Brazil or influential
evangelical pastors can't encourage
people to go believe that there's a cure
or to go gather in large crowds but
there's another part of me that I view
as that makes me very wary vesting
Silicon Valley tap companies with the
control to manage our discourse to
regulate what isn't isn't being
permitted to be expressed even if
they're clinging to scientific consensus
when doing so because as we've seen over
and over consensus from experts of all
types so often is wrong and this debate
that we are gonna have and need to have
can only happen if we're all dedicated
to ensuring that it could that it can
happen so I constructed this episode and
shows the guest that I chose to speak to
with the goal of ensuring this kind of
debate being fostered in and I hope that
it contributes to everybody thinking a
little bit more deeply and a little bit
more insightful yeah I know each of
these guests to help me to do that and I
hope that they help you to do that as
well so enjoy the new episode so I have
a special guest to join me to explore
these issues of the corona virus
pandemic that have been getting in my
view insufficient attention whether it's
civil liberties or the extent to which
we want to empower governments and
private corporations with greater power
to address the pandemic and that is the
NSA whistleblower the president of the
press freedom group freedom of the press
foundation on whose board I also sit the
president of the board of directors of
that group and the author last year of a
book about surveillance called permanent
record welcome to system update Edward
Snowden thanks so much for taking the
time to talk to me it's good to be with
you Clint thanks for having me on
yeah if memory serves I think we've
talked once or twice before but I'm
delighted to talk again so the reason
why I decided to focus this
episode on these questions of civil
liberties and investing the state with
authority versus the individual
liberties and civil liberties that we
cherish just because I know for myself
once in a visceral way I started
appreciating how dangerous this pandemic
truly was how lethal this virus was how
easily it spreads
I found myself for the first couple of
weeks kind of almost instinctively
relinquishing my general defensive and
clinging to civil liberties and and
almost wanting the government to seize
authorities that prior to this I would
never have dreamed about supporting and
I realized that we our psyches are
constructed in a way that when the first
order of survival need is imperiled
we're very easily manipulated or even
not necessarily manipulated but we're
very easily persuaded that we ought to
give up a lot of civil liberties and was
only after a couple weeks when that
started alarming me did I start trying
to calibrate for myself how does that
balance should be maintained so I'm
curious just on a kind of general level
when you have a global pandemic of this
kind what is your view about the proper
balance between civil liberties and
individual rights on the one hand and
investing governments without of
authorities on the other I think when
you were getting into the question that
the most important point was there and
that you yourself who have been you know
for years a pretty strident critic of
the the spread of authoritarianism the
rise of unlimited executive privileges
and authorities in country after country
even you go hey you know I'm worried
about this maybe they can
track the virus better if they start
doing this stat or the other as long as
we stop this thing this crazy inhuman
thing it's worth it and even if you know
in a moment of reflection you catch your
breath a week goes by three weeks go by
the headlines don't have as much sting
you start to adjust to the new normal
lean back and think about in a more
considered way on reflection and you
start to go well you know maybe maybe I
was a little bit rash there recognized
that as somebody who has like a self
identity as a critic of governments
you're still very much ahead of the
curve and this is I think the most
teachable moment in the current pandemic
something that we so often forget
whenever there is a crisis in any corner
of the world that begins reshaping laws
and reshaping societies and the
boundaries of our rights that we live in
and defend and over time try to expand
and that is that human emotion is itself
viral this is one of the basic
principles for internet and social media
you know they've done Studies on this
and they've seen the emotions that have
the largest contagion are anger and fear
right and what we are seeing is we're
seeing hysteria spread and remember a
fear can be rational this is a serious
problem this virus is a serious threat
to public health and well-being and
safety and we should do what we can to
mitigate it but what we've seen is a
panic sweep across the entire world the
political class the media class the sort
of commentariat and you can see it on
the Internet you know there's this one
group of people who are trying to bury
any suggestion that this is serious at
all absolute denialism of any facts and
evidence that there could be some danger
to this that we should put economic
limits in place whatever and then the
other side of this that says this is the
end of everything we're all going to die
every it's gonna get this and you know
it's just a kiss your relatives goodbye
because you're never going to see them
again
and the reality of course is it's more
complex it's somewhere in the middle but
that moment of intense instantly
transmissible fear is what happened to
us in 9/11 it's what happens to us in
the lead-up to every war it's what
happens to us whenever the government is
trying to start a campaign to gather new
authorities they say you know we're
going to protect you from roving gangs
we're going to protect the children
we're going to do whatever we can in
that moment that window of vulnerability
where rationality goes out of the window
because out of the room we are we are
all susceptible to it and that is what
we are seeing now we are only now
beginning to get our feet under us and
in the time that we now take a breath
and start looking at what's happened we
see governments around the world in
country after country
I have already begin helping themselves
so for example the the mass movements of
everyone everywhere to the maximum
extent of their capability which they
say is for tracking the spread of the
virus but all of the questions that you
know in a more considered time we would
have looked at like one does this work
is it effective and if it is effective
is it worth the cost that we're paying
and how will we make sure that this is
not permanent this is not the kind of
emergency measure that we got you know
20 years ago after September 11th that
never ended let me stop you there for a
second if I could on this this
comparison between the aftermath of 9/11
and and the fear-mongering that was
successfully exploited to do things I
introduced the Patriot Act with almost
no dissent and then ultimately a 19-year
war in Afghanistan an invasion of Iraq
powers of detention without due process
creating prisons in the middle of
violence things that had previously been
unimaginable that were justified in the
name of terrorism I know the Civil
Liberties community including myself
spent along a lot of time arguing not
necessarily that measures of that sort
are never justified but that they are
not just maybe some of those measures
justified like imprisoning people
without charges but that a lot of the
argument was about the nature and the
magnitude of the threat that the threat
itself was being exaggerated because
3,000 people died horrible deaths but in
a country of 270 million people at the
time with the great difficulty of
pulling something off like that again it
did seem like the cost-benefit analysis
have gone way off track in favor of
nothing but fear without any kind of
calculation here even though in the US
for example we're nowhere near the peak
of the pandemic far more people have
already died from this virus than have
died then died on a 9/11 to say nothing
of the death totals all around the world
so does that weigh in to your
calculation and all the idea that if we
don't take steps that we might otherwise
be very resistant to the death total
itself is going to completely dwarf 9/11
rendering that comparison a little bit
invalid well no we everyone looks at
these things and considers emergency
measures right it's natural and it's
appropriate in the context of human
experience when you have for a short
time in a short period a level of
sacrifice that needs to be made not for
the good of the individual for the good
of the community for the good of society
right think about you know you're on a
raft in the middle of the ocean you
don't drink all your water on the first
day even though you might be thirsty the
thing that I have a problem with is that
we see for example in the economic
context of what we have going on right
now we have a history at least in
American society but I think really
global society when we look at the last
half-century of repeatedly asking
sacrifices of those who have the least
capability to make those sacrifices
everybody is freaking out about the
economic crisis that has been provoked
by the fact that we're all at home were
all shut-in were socially distancing
were engaged in
trying to flatten the curve of
infections right just the the
logarithmic curve for those who aren't
following around where the virus rates
of infection keep doubling and doubling
doubling and doubling doubling will
overload the hospitals right so we're
trying to insert a breather by sending
everybody home going you're not gonna
see anybody therefore you're not gonna
transmit everything and this will take
the heat off the hospitals and again
this can makes sense and I think it does
make sense the real problem that we're
about to run into next is when they have
to let everybody out and then infection
rate begins to rise again and there was
a study that just came out of I think
the chance cool of Public Health from
Harvard where they were saying this
system of pumping the brakes or of
intermittent quarantine where they sent
everyone home and then then we let them
out and then they sent everyone home and
let them out will actually continue into
next year and if we don't that's in the
best case actually yeah we were
investing in let me talk about that
though because that that's I mean that's
a really momentous thing to say right
that okay social distancing works
isolation works it's something that's
necessary not to protect each individual
so each individual can decide to take
the risk because the reality is if you
don't socially distance if you go out on
the street you're endangering not only
yourself but you could overload the
entire healthcare system which prevents
other people who need medical attention
from getting it so it's a collective and
a societal interest as well so you
encourage social distancing and then a
lot of people do it but a lot of people
don't does it then become justifiable to
support powers of coercive quarantine I
mean one of the most draconian powers
you can vest in a government to bar
people from leaving their own homes
arresting them if they do but where do
you fall on that spectrum of the kinds
of measures not that we ought to just
encourage people voluntarily to follow
but that we ought to empower the state
to compel and enforce well I think this
depends on your personal perspective and
philosophy as to what the role of
government is and where those lines are
drawn for myself
I actually don't think the government
should have the mandatory authority to
say look nobody goes out you can't leave
you can't do this that or the other but
that's also for the a part of the reason
that I feel that way
is that I don't believe it's actually
necessary I believe the government makes
recommendations and we have the kind of
public education that's of a quality
that can convince people and persuade
them rationally that they should limit
the amount of time that they spend
outside that they spend in crowds you
know that they're in basically zones of
potential infection and transmission
they will make the right decisions
themselves this actually gets into the
contact tracing thing that we talked
about as well is it better for the
government just so you know break out
the jackboots and the batons and go look
nobody's out of their house or it's off
to the paddy wagon alternately do you
tell people look this is dangerous to
you it's dangerous to your family this
is a global pandemic you can reduce the
risk to yourself your community if you
follow this kind of recommendation and
here's why we make these recommendations
here's the basis for here are the facts
he's the best of our evidence and our
science I think most people will go
along with it this is similar to the
idea of let me let me let's stop there
for a second because I want to do
something today and my a millionaire has
never thought that was gonna do would
just make a pro surveillance case not
necessarily because I believe in this
case but because I think that it's far
more plausible than it was say three
months ago and I'm interested in your
thoughts on it so we've seen in the
first three months of this pandemic or
so starting in December in Wuhan a wide
variety of responses from different
countries so on the one hand you have
what would you could say is like the
most repressive means of dealing with
the pandemic which is what we saw in
China and probably Singapore which are
authoritarian countries to begin with
that used a lot of brut for
of literally dragging people out of
their homes when there were fevers
detected or other indicia of the virus
and and forcibly quarantine them and
essentially prison hospitals then you
have kind of on the other spectrum
Western democracies where individual
liberty is is more valued where people
are much more defiant of even suggestive
government messaging let alone
compulsory ones like in in in Western
Europe where the virus is really ravaged
places like Spain and and Italy and is
now doing the same in in the UK and in
France and so the kind of middle-ground
model that a lot of people have held up
as a country that avoided the harshest
repression of China but handled it much
better than Western Europe is South
Korea which relied heavily on the kind
of electronic surveillance that you and
I spent a lot of years advocating
against in order to do things like
contact tracing and find where people
who had the virus interacted with other
people in order to then remove them from
the population or quarantine them or
reward them and although it's unclear
how every country is doing because these
official counts are not very reliable
it does seem clear that South Korea did
a better job than most countries of not
all countries in managing the initial
outbreak by using electronic
surveillance does that make you Edward
Snowden more receptive to the idea that
perhaps we ought to allow state
governments a little bit more leeway a
little bit more authority on a on a
temporary basis if that's such a thing
exists to use that kind of surveillance
data with the noble goal of trying to
get this pandemic under control without
having to use more repressive measures
like we saw in Singapore in China
nice try I would say look there's
there's a lot of presumption in the sort
of example in the question there one of
them is that South Korea relied heavily
on this it is true that they did sort of
embrace quickly these kind of location
tracking measures it is not clear how
much it helped it is actually it could
be argued that South Korea's case is
exceptional for a number of
is one of which the largest spread came
from a very specific region because it
was a religious community that was very
tightly knit and it was spreading
through them they were in a local region
and then you could look at that there is
also the distinction between Asian
cultures the in-group versus out group
importance so what you see when you look
at like a Japan or a South Korea are
countries that already have a culture of
whenever someone gets a cold
they put a flu mask on I lived in Japan
I saw this right and that's without a
pandemic they also remember the SARS
pandemic and they made preparations in
response to it so I would say actually
what you saw was South Korea doing in
across the board push to grasp at any
capabilities that they had applying them
with the to the maximum extent that they
could and that this is crucial the
public listened to expert
recommendations that were coming from
health authorities they made it some
voluntary individual took voluntary
individual actions like mask wearing and
hand sanitizing things like that that
could limit the transmissibility and
infectiousness of it and what we see is
the collective voluntary action can be
very effective now when we look at the
counter example that you have here of an
authoritarian Society of China we go
well what if South Korea took a Chinese
example here would they have been more
effective in halting the spread of the
virus if they had just welded people
into their homes right if they had
chained people's doors turned off the
elevators you know blocked the stairways
set up cameras outside the homes you
know said people can't leave without a
special pass from the government all of
these things it's not clear that that
would have been more effective and in
fact I think there's a very strong
argument that it actually would have
been worse
when you look at the example of China we
need to understand that given the
the Chinese Communist Party and there
shall we say tenuous relationship with
factual reporting it is very possible
that the response to the pandemic and
the manner in which it was taken in
China caused more harm than what would
have happened in a South Korean style
response we have direct documented cases
where they chained the doors to people's
house they wouldn't allow them to go
home from the hospital and they had
dependents at home children with
disabilities and things like that who
literally starved to death in the
absence of their caretakers now putting
all that on the table acknowledging that
is there a case where some surveillance
can be useful obviously yes I mean look
I signed up to work for the CIA and the
NSA I know surveillance can be and just
to remind people one of the arguments
both you and I made during the height of
the controversy triggered by your
whistleblowing was not that the case
that was being made that that caused you
to come forward was an also opposition
to surveillance quite the country you
were in favor of targeted surveillance
with safeguards against people for whom
a court had decided there was evidence
that they were engaged in terrorist acts
or other dangerous acts right you're not
against search warrants or wiretap
approved by a court what you were
opposed to us mass surveillance abuse
without any constraints or safeguards so
that kind of leads me into that question
brought into this context which is and
you were getting to this and I just want
to remind people of what your prior
posture was and mine to apply it here
which is is there a framework of
targeted limited controlled responsible
surveillance that you could get behind
if done with the proper motives and
under the right conditions with the
right safeguards
yeah I I think what people are presuming
here and this was the presumption of the
question put me forward put to me before
is the idea that this is a choice
between mass surveillance or just a
completely uncontrolled spread of an
infectious virus that can cause serious
disease and I don't think that's
accurate in fact I know that's accurate
I'm you know I know a little something
about how surveillance works here what
we are being asked is to accept
involuntary mass surveillance in a way
that has never been done before at this
scale in the context of a real crisis
they go look we're just gonna do this
the data already exists phone companies
we're going to apply it to sort of a new
use case we're going to take this
surveillance infrastructure that exists
but or rather we're going to take this
communications infrastructure that was
not designed for surveillance or rather
it's told to us that would not be used
or abused for surveillance and we're
going to use it for precisely that but
for a really good reason now they say
that this is necessary they say that
there's no alternative they say that if
you want to save lives you have to do
this but that's not true again the
question here is between the involuntary
surveillance of everyone that has been
carrying a phone over you know the last
however many weeks or months or years
that they want to look back to because
remember these records of your movements
of your phone at least by 18t in the
United States are reported to go back to
2008 everywhere your phone has traveled
since 2008 they know and then there's no
laws regulating how long they can retain
this information in large part in the
United States now imagine an alternative
you go to the hospital you are diagnosed
with an infection and the doctor goes it
would be really helpful for you to be
able to voluntarily share the movements
of your phone so you're going with your
app you show them oh hey I was sitting
next to a guy who I don't know who they
are but you just said they were infected
you now get priority access to this kind
of testing you can get priority access
to treatment because it is clear that
you have potentially been exposed and
none of this requires privacy sacrifices
none of this requires any sort of
involuntary or intrusive violation of
Rights and the funny thing is these
capabilities are not difficult to create
this platform you know could have been
slapped together in four days by a bunch
of university researchers working
together if they had had and the kind of
funding in the mandate and the support
because I think this I think and this
leads to what a it intended to be the
last question which is a lot of your
answers are predicated on the
desirability not of government coercion
but a voluntary conduct that is not only
in the individuals and light and
self-interest but in the interest as
well of society which in term means that
there's a flow of information that's
accurate and reliable and trustworthy
that people put their faith in
confidence in as kind of a reliable font
of authority for their to form their
understanding about how the pandemic
functions and maybe not sure but I
suspect it's the case that there are
countries in which there is faith in
some kind of centralized authority
whether it's scientists or the
government or media outlets that they
trust to get this information and it can
be effective but in other countries
certainly in the US and it's true in
here in Brazil and it's definitely true
throughout Western Europe there's a
collapse of trate trust in these
institutions of authority where people
aren't sure anymore what to believe and
so for example here in Brazil one of the
things we have is on the one hand you
have a lot of scientists you have the
big media outlets
disseminating what is the scientific
consensus throughout the West and in
Asia about how the pandemic functions
about the need for social distancing and
isolation about the threat and lethality
of this virus but then on the other hand
you have a lot of power centers
including the president of the country
his family his media outlets has
followers evangelical pastors saying
entirely inaccurate things just
scientifically false claims about
there's no need to socially isolate
there's no need to socially distance the
threat of the from economic harm is much
greater than the threat of this virus it
only kills people above 70 if you're
already sick and what has happened is
companies like Facebook and Twitter and
Google that control our discourse online
have started censoring and deleting
messages from the president of Brazil
high-level officials the same thing
happened in Venezuela on the ground that
they're disseminating information that
is contrary to the scientific consensus
so on the one hand your solutions of
voluntary conduct need and depend upon
the citizenry being persuaded about
basic scientific facts and what's in
their own interest which in turn means
that they can't be misled or deceived
into doing things that are irrational on
the other hand there are dangers I think
to having companies like Facebook and
Google and Twitter control our discourse
to the point of even censoring the
messaging that comes from democratically
elected leaders as unhinged and
extremist and authoritarian as they
might be so if your solution your vision
for how this can best be calibrated
relies on an informed citizenry does
that make you more amenable to having
these tech companies exert a little bit
more control while we're in this crisis
over people's ability to to see people
with misinformation or even falsehoods
and lies when you ask this question look
you know am i comfortable with Facebook
and
you know Google YouTube whoever of that
but it's like four properties that
basically were on the world today Jeff
Bezos decides what you can and can't buy
on Amazon you know Facebook decides what
you can and can't post on social media
you know Jack Dorsey or whatever gets
dragged into this and it has to be the
politics police is that correct
because some people abuse their
authority and no I don't think the
solution to the abuse of authority is to
create more platforms for the abuse of
authority I don't believe making Mark
Zuckerberg the central authority for the
things that can and cannot be said is an
improvement on the situation what we are
seeing in exactly the situation that you
described with Bolson ro with Donald
Trump with all of these people denying
basic facts is intentional it's not a
mistake
it is a sustained campaign that's been
running for more than a decade now to
reduce trust in some of the most
important institutions when we're
talking about expert understanding of
complex nuanced subjects because the
facts are not in their favor this is a
political struggle for influence and
when the facts are against them go well
why don't we undermine the facts this is
centrally in my mind an abuse of
authority it is their platform their
trust from their voters who believe that
they will do what's best for these
voters and they go and use it for you
know callous and self-interested
political ends to improve their own lot
in the next election right but I think
what we are seeing as a result of this
is we're seeing more harm from the abuse
of authority then we are suffering from
a lack of authority the government today
in basically any country you point to is
more powerful than it has ever been in
any moment in human history and all of
these institutions all of these
different political parties in all of
these different cultures all of these
different languages are now coming to
their people simultaneously around the
world going well the problem see is we
don't have enough
that's not persuasive to me and I think
what we see right now in fact is that
this is the turning of an age this
pandemic I believe which is a serious
problem don't mistake me as downplaying
the severity of this what we are seeing
is it is revealing structural flaws not
just in our system of government but in
the system broadly you know capitalized
proper noun here there is an idea that
governments you know going back hundreds
of years exist only for certain reasons
the government is there to provide a
basic level of security you know this
this idea of a sense of order economic
well-being right it is providing for
individuals for people that they cannot
provide for themselves and what we are
seeing in places like the United States
and around the world is in fact these
are the very governments that have
unbalanced the system economically that
have engaged in the kind of aggressive
Wars endless wars under the bush and
cheney administration that then were
underwritten by the Obama administration
now adopted by the Trump administration
wars without end sort of taking a a pet
crime like terrorism which is a serious
crime but it is still crime nonetheless
and now making it a matter of state
right we are elevating criminals to the
the levels of equal sovereigns right
Isis is being treated like it's a nation
as opposed to very large organized crime
syndicate and when you look at the fact
that they're not maintaining a sense of
order
in fact our countries are becoming more
fractious and divided they're not
providing the security that we're being
asked for they're not being good
stewards of the public's health the
public's economy or crucially the
public's
rights which i think is really what we
should be saying people have trouble
with guaranteeing themselves at scale
right justice can you say the
government's today are doing a good job
insuring sort of uniform access to
justice you wrote an entire book and the
United States or about the US justice
system's unequal access to justice I
think it was called liberty and justice
for some that's a free plug for the
audience there yeah we won't be at that
part out yeah yeah now the idea here is
when when you look at these things
broadly and you look at all of these
governments panicking what has begun now
is a race between governments to
entrench their power to reintroduce them
that has failed us and is continuing to
fail us and that in a very real way for
people who are dependent upon it
economically and now medically it has
betrayed us and a race has begun between
all of the crises that this system has
produced that are now working to
persuade people that maybe the system
needs to be replaced and the people who
are benefiting from those systems to
hold it in place and I think this is the
on answered question of where this is
going to go but this story of the next
100 years or more is going to be has the
system that has served us to this point
is it under our control
politically publicly ideologically is it
serving our needs and is the problem
simply that it doesn't have enough power
we need to move closer to sort of this
Chinese model of unlimited authoritarian
demands in response to emerging crises
or do we need to actually look for
something that's got a little less
authority that is available for abuse
crises are always exploited by political
actors to gain authorities that would
otherwise be forbidden to them and
we can understand as people who are
impacted by these policies that there
can be benefits but at the point these
policies are being sought these benefits
are theoretical often there is no
evidence for them and they may never
materialize but the consequences of
granting these authorities are
inevitable there has never been a moment
in history where it we have created what
is being stood up today a system where a
government any government can know the
location of every person at every time
this is the architecture of oppression
they're saying they're not turning it on
they're saying they're not using it for
you know marching people off to camps
and right now I believe them but do you
want a government that at any moment can
round up people of any political
persuasion of people who clicked on this
link of people who are at this place at
that time and you know even if they say
it's anonymous data right we don't know
these people we're just looking at the
movements of the population broadly not
an individual scale we want to see who's
breaking quarantine and they go well
look there's 30 people congregating in a
park shouldn't be there
maybe it's religious group maybe it's a
political group and you know what that
capability will exist in three months in
three years and in 30 years if we allow
it to be implemented today yeah I think
I think that's the key point and exactly
for that reason you know I think a lot
of us have had a good few weeks of just
kind of first thinking about our own
health and our own safety and that of
our families kind of trying to get a
hold on on what this pandemic is and and
what the basic scientific facts of it
are and the political facts of it are
and now it's definitely time to start
questioning in a serious way everything
that's being proposed in the name of
curbing it of limiting it and stopping
it and that more than anything is the
reason why I wanted to talk to you
because I knew you you would be one of
the ideal people to start raising these
questions in an irrational and
compelling way so I'm super glad that we
got to take some
Timon and talk about this and I have a
feeling that it's gonna take more than
just one conversation to to sound the
alarm about the need to be vigilant that
your rational fears aren't exploited for
ends other than what people are claiming
they're being exploited for oh yeah I
just for anybody out there who's
listening right now who's struggling
because this has been not a good few
weeks this has been a very difficult few
weeks for for everyone really everywhere
it's not wrong it's not weird to be
scared I have family members who have
lost their jobs I think everybody has we
are in a vulnerable position and we are
being made to depend on a system that we
do not really understand and do not have
that much control over ask yourself why
for decades you have been asked to give
more and more and when a moment of
crisis comes and Congress starts
throwing money around we're getting the
smallest portion of the resource instead
it's going off to banks and Airlines and
commercial lending paper and finance and
none of this stuff anybody but the
Congress people who are benefiting from
understand and then think about now the
only thing that we have left our rights
our ideals our values as people that's
what they're coming for now that's what
they're asking us to give up that's what
they're asking to change and remember
that from a perspective live a free
society you know a virus is a serious
problem it is harmful but the
destruction of our rights is fatal
that's permanent yeah and it's it takes
work to think about the second whereas
our survival instincts very easily let
us think about the first and that's
where the imbalance can can arise and
thank you so much for this discussion I
think it was extremely illuminating I
think it was the right moment to have it
and I really appreciate your taking the
time to talk thank you stay
so I'm delighted to welcome to system
update Andre Domi's who is among other
things a contributing editor at the
Canadian news magazine MacLaine's as
well as a writer and activist who
focuses on a broad array of civil
Bertie's issues concerning protest
movement state authority and the like
and he's here to help us explore some of
what I think are the overlooked aspects
of the pandemic and the state's response
to them so just to provide the context
for what has brought us here this is not
the first time we've spoken in the last
week it's actually the second the first
came about because you had emailed me to
say that you were working on an essay
for McLean's about what you called some
thorny issues concerning this pandemic
that you thought weren't getting
sufficient attention and you had
identified for me in the email a couple
of them including the fact that we're
all kind of living our lives digitally
and therefore turning over huge amounts
of information more than we ever did
before to companies that may or may not
be trustworthy and and also some of the
kind of sociological or political
implications that are likely to endure
even once this pandemic end and then I
actually was happy to talk to you
because I hadn't given much thought to
any of those topics and I think we both
found that the conversation was
thought-provoking for each of us and
agreed that we would do it in this
format as well so let me begin by asking
you what are the kind of cure three
thorny issues that you think aren't
getting the attention they deserve with
regard to one of the things that that's
me immediately was that when we when
governments began shrinking the
acceptable number of people that can
congregate in one place for obvious
reasons the more people congregated in
one place the easier it is for the
disease to spread you're you're creating
a disease vector so for very obvious
reasons there's been restrictions on on
civil liberties and the ability to to
organize in one place the problem with
that though is that as we've always seen
in the past governments tend to veer
towards overreach so for example when
the Canadian government was rather the
other liberal governing power in Canada
right now
was trying to put together a package for
the kovat 19 relief response one of the
provisions that ended up in a draft of
the bill that they were putting together
but didn't make it through the final
vote was that they were going to
concentrate the power of spending and
Taxation within one federal cabinet that
is the other the Ministry of Finance so
essentially one Minister Bill Morneau
would have the ability to direct
spending and Taxation for the entire
country but it wouldn't be subject to
parliamentary assent so if there are no
opposition members inside of that that
cabinet then essentially the Liberals
can just pass unilateral spending and
taxation measures which is a huge
problem now had that gone through with
the final vote and if people decided
that they wanted to organize a mass
protest against that ability well it
would be technically illegal and this is
what always happens when there's a
disaster scenario that the government
begins its its campaign overreach that
private companies start licking their
chops and figuring out okay well where
can we make money off of all this and
the ability of the average citizen like
your average human being who doesn't pay
attention to the stuff for a living may
be affected by it is having trouble
covering rent or having trouble covering
their mortgages seeing work hours cut
and so forth they they get the entire
blowback of that like all of the the
economic fallout falls on their
shoulders but they have no ability to
resist that so that's that's kind of
what raised the hair on the back of my
neck so one of the points you raised and
had asked me about was something that I
really hadn't given any thought to
before and then once you described it
really started alarming me and I thought
about it a lot since and wanted to talk
about it more with you here which was
this idea that we have on the one hand
states that are obviously acquiring more
power than they ever had before in a lot
of instances power that a lot of us
never would have dreamed of acquiescing
to and yet are now if not comfortable
with at least seeing the validity of
then acquiring on the short-term and
then you also simultaneously have large
powerful corporations that are becoming
even more powerful as a result of
competitors going out of business and
the big giants that are gonna be
remained standing like Amazon and
Facebook and Google and others and the
supply chain are gonna be more powerful
than ever so you have this increase in
power on the one hand of both public and
private power centers but then on the
other hand and this is the point that
you had raised and I think that I'm
really interested to hear your thoughts
on it more is while that's happening not
only are we not really being very
concerned about it because we kind of
have this obsession by instinct with
this first-order concern of survival so
it's harder to think about these kind of
second-order considerations like civil
liberties and individual freedom and I
know I had that challenge when I was
doing the Snowden reporting how do you
get people who are scared of having
their children blow up and a terrorist
attack to care about the government not
reading their emails but here it's even
more acute right because the fear seems
even more tangible but beyond that kind
of standard ability for governments to
demagogue based on fear we're all by
necessity physically separated from one
another we're all I'm not able to go fly
to Montreal or Toronto and meet with you
and meet with other Canadian activists
because I am confined to my house just
like you are we're only able to interact
digitally and one of the things that you
had raised was the implications for one
of the few weapons that we as citizens
have in the face of corporate or
government overreach which is the
ability to protest what is it that you
see happening with regard to that
critical weapon that we have as a result
of these changes from the pandemic there
was the assistant manager at an Amazon
warehouse I name's Christian smalls who
raised several of arms and raised some
workplace safety issues I said that he
had gone to his bosses and I spoke into
people from Amazon HQ that conditions in
their warehouse were unsafe that people
were able to get paid leave if they pet
if they tested positive
for kovat 19 but if they hadn't tested
positive and decided to stay home
because they didn't want to risk
infecting the workplace well then they
would have unlimited unpaid time off but
they wouldn't be paid for that so
obviously if you're not feeding people
to come in but their rents are still do
they still have to eat they self to buy
food etc while they're gonna go into the
workplace so he was saying that he was
turning people away from the workplace
and because he raised that alarm and
gave an interview to a Jacobin magazine
he was he was sent home and not only was
he was he sent home but Jay Carney the
former spokesman for the Obama
administration they had the other former
press secretary Jay Carney writes a
tweet to Bernie Sanders saying hey I'm
not sure if you know about the
background of the situation but and then
he goes on to tell sort of Amazon HQ
side of the story so on the one hand you
have this one worker you know this like
the one of the lowest people on the
corporate ladder that speaks up about
safety conditions and then on the other
hand you have Amazon's senior VP former
press secretary for the Obama
administration that's basically singling
him out and making him look like he was
violating safety rules and that they
sent him home for his own safety and the
safety of that in that of his colleagues
so the ability for Amazon workers to
stand up on mass and say absolutely not
we're not going to take the these
conditions it makes it harder for them
to collectively organized but how can
they collectively organize how can they
plan a mass walkout how can construction
workers all leave the the mass on-site
and start picketing well they can't do
that because there are city bylaws now
that are being adapted piecemeal
municipality by municipality saying that
if hey listen if you want to
collectively organize you go ahead but
make sure that you stay at least six
feet away from each other or we're gonna
put you in jail and give you a $5,000
fine well well but what what then I mean
there's there's others there are
increasingly legal constraints on our
ability to gather in protest but there
are also health concerns right I mean we
are kind of confined to our house not
for invented concocted fabricated
reasons but for genuine medical ones and
you know I was thinking about this you
know one of the reasons why the concerns
you raised resently with me because it's
because here in brazil where the bolts
and our government has been incredibly
reckless and to the point of being
sociopathic about its response to the
pan
in a way that has turned even a lot of
previous supporters of the government
against the president there have been
these mass but you have been called
protests and what I kind of considered
to be protest for a while but the
protests consist of people going to
their windows of the apartments and
houses to which they're confined and
picking up a pot and a spoon and begging
on it and creates a lot of noise and
it's a pretty dramatic news story and it
indicates a lot of discontent among the
population but it's not very menacing
right we're kind of like caged animals
all separate from one another and that's
the most that we can actually do and
then on top of that you know I think
that one of the things that our
conversation made me realize is that not
only are we physically segregated from
one another which prevents us from
collectively resisting any kind of
incursions into our liberties like the
examples that you just gave even small
amazon strikes that can be kind of
pathologized or criminalized as a
violation of public help but even
psychologically you were kind of now
being trained to regard one another as
not as comrades or as people with whom
we can join in order to fight against
injustice but as threats right as
vectors and carriers of lethal disease
and I know that when people come near my
house or come deliver something that you
order you know you just without wanting
to you see them as a danger that needs
to be avoided rather than someone with
whom you can create a connection or with
whom you can collaborate and it just
does start to seem like power centers
are radically strengthening while at the
same time we're becoming fractured not
just isolate in terms of our isolation
physically and not just our
psychological makeup to view one another
as enemies but even physically right
we're kind of like weakening in terms of
our inability that you exercise and
we're just kind of staying at home which
is kind of a metaphor for how we're all
weakening and I just wonder what that
imbalance is is going to entail for our
future even once this pen
is over my fiancee yesterday and she
said it's it's funny we're now all
become the the humans of the future from
that movie wall D you know we're we're
all just like sort of like digitally
connected were completely alienated from
one another we sort of like operate on
these like you know our households are
basically like those moving pods and
we're all just sitting around you know
waiting for something to happen the the
problem with the the isolation and
alienation part that you're mentioning
is the humans are social creatures we're
not meant to live in isolation so it's
it's becoming really difficult for me I
can't visit some of my older relatives
and you know having to check up on them
and make sure that they're okay is one
thing but actually being able to see
them give them a hug and so forth that
that's just a part of my culture that
I'm having a really hard time dealing
with right now is that I can't go see my
grandmother I can't go see my
great-uncle's and so on
the other part is as you mentioned the
the the comrades that we would normally
collectively organized with well they're
now alienated from us because we're all
other all of us kind of see each other
as a possible vector of disease and this
is I mean the the implications of this
are bad because not only do we have a
hard time trusting each other under a
tan imperialist and a capitalist system
as it is like we have a hard time
trusting one another that we're not
trying to just like get one over on our
colleagues so that we can climb the
ladder a little bit faster than
everybody else but now we can't have
in-person conversations I can't call up
some people in the neighborhood and sit
down and have a coffee with them or or
sit down over breakfast and talk about
hey what do we do next we can't do that
everything is now mediated over to these
digital platforms that we know have been
collecting information on us I don't
know that you know I for example like
Skype or Google or anyone is interested
in in tuning in on our individual
conversations but the the data that they
pull from those conversations has been
used against us in the sense that they
use the information that they collect
for example from self-driving cars to
mediate the possibility of managing risk
for insurance companies you know making
sure that drivers are driving safe and
slowing down and so forth if I turn on
my Google Maps while I'm driving I keeps
a track oh it keeps track of how fast my
vehicle is going if I'm talking to you
right now there's metadata flowing that
shows that I'm having a conversation
with Glenn Greenwald now the
problem is when the Trump administration
for example reaches out to the social
media company it reaches out to these
digital media communication companies
and says hey we'd like to get a hold of
the the data from people's phones like
from their mobile devices and from the
software they're using to figure out how
we can track the spread of this virus
I mean sure that that is a valid use for
that data and we've seen for example in
in South Florida how groups of Spring
Breakers get together and the the
tracking of all of their cell phone data
showed that as they congregated together
in one beach and then spread apart they
themselves became disease vectors that's
useful information but then what other
information can be pulled from that if
we decide hang on a second we're not
okay with these conditions anymore and
now we're going to look at collectively
organizing what else can that data be
used for we don't know that because
we're not told the data that's that's
being collected on us we're not being
told exactly what it's being used for
that's the part that worries me yeah you
know so I there were a couple of books
written in the last two years that I
think are while controversial incredibly
thought-provoking in in inning lots of
ways valid both by the British
journalist Johann Hari one was about
addiction the other one was about
depression and they essentially asked
similar questions about each of those
pathologies which is the internet when
it was born would the promise of it was
it was gonna be this technology that was
going to connect human beings in an
unprecedented way we're all gonna be
connected to one another we could talk
to people around the world right you're
in Canada I'm in Brazil with you and I
can have a conversation and see each
other as we do with with ease and and
and and and actually it's free to do it
over Skype and other services so on the
one hand we are kind of more connected
and then the question becomes well if
that's the case if we're all more
connected than ever and in touch with
one another and can explore the world
why in advance Western democracies where
this technology is more available than
anywhere else are things like depression
and addiction and suicide skyrocketing
and he has a lot of complicated answers
including the fact that you know
neoliberalism and capitalism has just
stripped our communities and stripped
our lives and the things we most need
but
his principle answers was that this
connectivity that the intercept that the
internet provides is actually very part
it's very partial it's very incomplete
the analogy that he makes is it's like
having sex through pornography it
performs some of the functions but it
deprives you of the vibrancy and the
actual fulfillment on the deepest and
most meaningful level and that's how he
says is he sees digital connectivity
that the more we interact with each
other digitally the more we're deprived
on a psychological and social level and
now that's our lives I mean other than
the people with whom I'm isolated I
don't remember the last time I
interacted with anybody in a non digital
way so you know that has to happen
during psychological effects beyond just
the trauma of having our lives upended
and a very rapid fundamental and
unexpected way with very little warning
but I guess then the question becomes
this is what you and I spent some time
talking about I still don't quite know
the answer to it is how is it that we
navigate and reconcile these concerns
with the very real danger this pandemic
poses right like for the war on terror
and the debates that we had over fear
mongering versus the erosion of civil
liberties for me it was a little bit
easy because to me it seemed clear the
threat of terrorism by Muslim extremist
groups was radically exaggerated by
States deliberately to put the
population in unwarranted fear and in
order to gain more power in this case I
don't think it's entirely unwarranted
I'm not going out unless I absolutely
have to and I don't want my family
members going out either because they
think the threat is very real so what
are you doing what do you see as that
proper approach to make sure that we're
not on the one hand being reckless with
our own health and the health of the
society but on the other hand not caving
into or capitulating to a kind of you
know panic or fear mongering that that
makes it excessive where does that
balance life the thing that I've found
most helpful is to you know help out
words needed in the neighborhood up
until this past week I was going out for
grocery runs and
you know if there were people who are
disabled for example they couldn't leave
their homes to go to the grocery stores
people who were immunocompromised people
who simply couldn't afford food etc to
go out and just buy things just make
oneself as useful as possible um but
because I have older relatives that have
to check up check up on now I can't
really take that risk anymore so I'm
just making donations so I think like
the the the the best thing you can
probably do right now is just to reach
out to the people around you you know
the people in your neighborhood the
community associations the food banks
whoever just like get to know who they
are get to know their names ask how
everyone's doing if they're okay if
there's anything that you can do to help
and if you can't help absolutely do i I
think that to your point about the sort
of alienating effect that the Internet
has is that it has also sort of pulled
us out of our immediate communities so I
can plug into the internet and have a
conversation with you all the way down
in Brazil and I'm in just outside of
Toronto Ontario Canada I can have this
conversation with you but if I don't
know who my next-door neighbor is if I
don't know if they need anything if I
don't know on the people on my block
that's a bit of a problem and that's one
of the things that the Internet has done
is sort of I wouldn't say made it more
difficult but it's made it a lot easier
for us to connect to people that are not
geographically close to us and alienated
us from our immediate communities but
that's the thing that we absolutely need
right now is to be closer to our media
communities to your point on you know
mediating these conversations through
the internet like it's you also have to
keep in mind that when we're having
conversations for example like I'm on
Twitter a lot like I'm have you on these
tweets and Twitter which is I mean it's
part of it a stress relief part of it is
like news gathering and so forth but you
also have to keep in mind that Twitter
is a platform that is designed to make
money off of the ability to tell
advertisers they can sell you things hal
varian who is Google's chief economist
gave a speech back in 2010 he was the
the Richard tle lecturer for the
American economics Association and he
talks about the wonderful possibilities
that are available through computer
mediated transactions you know aside
from being able to facilitate new forms
of contracts being able to you know get
more data being able to analyze that
data because suddenly data becomes a
valuable thing they doesn't have a goal
why being able to personalize and
customize services for for individual
needs but then there was one more thing
that he added which raised a lot of
alarm bells and you know made it into a
book by dr. Shoshana Zubov the author of
the age of surveillance capitalism and
that is facilitate controlled
experimentation that you know social
media platforms and visual platforms
possibly have the ability to alter human
behavior there are ways you can sort of
tweak the way that we respond to things
so on the one hand you know it's great
that we can get information very quickly
we can get accurate information quickly
we can make sure that we propagate
accurate information quickly at the same
time if you're dumping your entire life
into the online space but you're not out
in the real world getting fresh air
talking to the human beings around you
then you subject yourself to those the
processes of experimentation and
behavior modification yeah you know it's
it's interesting because obviously
there's immense amounts of suffering and
and you know not just physical and
medical suffering but economic suffering
as a result of this pandemic and the
other hand there is an aspect to it
which is I don't want to call it
positive but I think it's important to
find some silver linings which is in
some sense it has forcibly simplified
our lives I mean I know speaking for
myself and and it's funny to hear you
talking about just the kind of
asphyxiating or claustrophobic healing
of isolation since we're only in our
second or third week depending where we
are and we at least have you know there
are eight ten twelve fourteen weeks
minimum when I tell you the the horror
case said that I normally see posted
after like 1:00 a.m. on Twitter are now
breaching into the daytime timeline
that's what I know we're headed towards
chaos yeah you see behavioral change
taking place in very real time and and
you know one of the new I'd look at my
own life and I mean I notice you know
for example my husband is a congressman
he works half the time in Brasilia he
flies home to Rio so half the time he's
away out of the house because of my work
you know I'm often traveling as well our
kids go to school they're there for the
whole day they have people who help take
care of them and yet because of this
isolation you know we haven't gotten on
a plane in three weeks and aren't likely
to for quite
so we're not going to be you know jetted
to the other side of the world in a
metal tube across time zones we're not
getting into cars and phonetically
running away from each other we're
spending more time with one another than
we have in in years and although maybe
five or ten percent at the time I
actually want to you know murder them
and suffocate them on in a lot of ways
it's actually been kind of gratifying
this kind of simplification of our lives
is forced effort to say or have our
lives become a little bit too modernized
and therefore a little bit you fractured
which explains the kind of social
pathologies I was describing earlier
regarding depression and suicide and and
and an addiction but on the other hand
you know and this is what I like to just
kind of end our discussion by asking you
with regard to the macro dangers of
investing states with greater powers
because of fear and then the
impossibility virtually of wrestling
that away from them even though it's
intended to be temporary are we doing
enough I mean do you think that we're
airing on the excessive side of fear and
a need to be resisting these
apprehensions of government authority
more or do you consider that the states
are more or less being rational and
balanced and how they're trying to
manage this pandemic I can't answer the
question as to whether states are being
rational I would assume that states are
acting in the state's interest but
behind the state are you know a coterie
of people that manage the levers of the
state so the question is are they being
rational on day being reasonable well
from the perspective of trying to
mitigate a virus viral outbreak I would
assume that having people stay at home
and not gathering together in large
groups is a rational response at the
same time look at what's being passed in
the meantime what is what is happening
in the meantime so we see a gigantic
bailout for example of American airline
companies we see that there were people
that are gonna fall through the cracks
both in Canada and the United States
which is where I've been keeping up with
the kovat relief most closely because of
the the tripwire of of qualified income
there are a lot of people that are not
going to be able to qualify it for the
relief so we Canada for example if you
were a gig worker or if you were
self-employed and didn't make very much
money if you if you basically are like
on the the bottom margins of society you
may not
and qualify for the relief in the United
States you're it's easier for you to
qualify but there's still the
possibility that if you can't show the
qualifying income you're gonna fall
through so art is is there a rational
and reasonable response I would say so
probably yes in the sense that we were
made to stay home but then what's being
cast in the meantime is it going to be
adequate enough who is it helping the
most in Canada for example we just gave
a gift to to the oil extraction
companies and this has been a
contentious issue in Canada for the last
several years because we are fighting to
stop being a Petro state we're fighting
to stop being an imperial disaster that
commits genocide against indigenous
peoples that breaks land trees violates
contracts and runs roughshod over their
rights to self-determination now because
we're in the middle of a pandemic
response we're looking at passing these
measures and injecting cash into these
companies at the very same time that
we're talking about trying to green our
economy and shift away from a
carbon-based energy industry so III
don't know the answer to that what I do
know though is that here's what we're
looking at small businesses are
suffering a lot of small businesses are
going to go away right so your your
local your restaurants your mom-and-pop
shops your corner stores and so on those
are going to suffer through this crisis
a lot of them are not going to make it a
lot of the the landlord's even though
they've gotten mortgage relief if you
don't have tenants and nobody has the
ability to raise money to buy a business
and set up shop and one of the buildings
that you own then the price of real
estate ends up going down so once you've
been able to scoop out sort of like the
the lower tier businesses but the larger
business is companies like Amazon are
not only making an influx of money
because we've shunted our commercial
activities to these online purchasers so
companies like Amazon companies like
Walmart but also companies like Costco
are now being able to hire more people
I'm azan talking about hiring a hundred
thousand odd more workers hiring more
people but they're going to be hiring
people that are probably overqualified
for their positions so you have this
massive substrate of qualified and
educated people that are taking jobs
that are below their pay grade and below
their education level we're all
competing for this you have this
gigantic
fit of labor and when you have a
gigantic surfeit of labor and fewer
employers and the employers have the
leverage in that conversation so that's
the part I think that we need to watch
out for especially as we come out of the
tail end of this pandemic is first of
all get to know the people in the your
community
the second organize organize organize
make sure that you are keeping your eye
on the ability to once we're past this
disaster get a whole bunch of people
together in the same place at the same
time and say absolutely not we're not
gonna take this you know absolutely not
we're not gonna have like the wall'
mortification and the Amazon offical of
our local neighborhoods like know we're
going to support our small businesses
you know no we're not going to have
Amazon continuing to union-busting
practices and fire employees who who
raise safety hazard awareness we're just
not gonna tolerate that so I think like
coming out of this that's gonna be the
most important response not just to pay
attention to what our governments are
doing but also be able to because I mean
at the end of it there are really only
three ways that you can create social
and systemic change one is to have the
money two is to have the guns and three
is to have the people well everyone's
gonna be broke so we're not gonna have
the money the government has all the
guns so what we have left are people our
ability to get - to bring together the
masses of people and that's all that
we're gonna be able to rely on when we
come out at the end of this is each
other yeah and unfortunately right now
we're very fractured we're very afraid
and and we're not even able to leave our
homes in except in in limited cases and
a lot of people are less able to do it
than others so it presents real
challenges especially since we don't
know how long that's can we continue to
be the case for under a lemme I take
them the opportunity thank you very much
not just for spending the time to talk
to me today but also for reaching out to
do an interview it really spurned a lot
of thought that I had kind of been
avoiding just I think the instinct when
something like this happens is you start
in the first instance worrying about
your own health and the health of your
family and and we kind of have the
responsibility especially those of us
with public platforms to pay attention
to these broader issues and to resist
those kind of instinctive fears that
that we quite naturally have as part of
our psyche and and the conversation that
we had helped me do that and I hope and
believe that the one we just had will
help
others do that as well so thanks very
much all right take care
okay joining me now to discuss a grossly
overlooked aspect of the corona virus
pandemic namely the relationship between
lethal viruses and other diseases on the
one hand and the practices of industrial
agriculture and factory farms on the
other is Cassie king who is a very
courageous and experienced investigator
and activist with the animal rights
group direct action everywhere Cassie
thank you so much for taking the time to
talk to me thank you so much for having
me on and for discussing this issue yeah
absolutely then I think it's an issue
that needs to be discussed because over
the past few years that you think the
animal rights issue the cause of animal
rights has received a lot more attention
than it did previously a lot more
support than it did previously often
it's because of the ethical concerns
over the systemic torture of animals
other times more recently it's because
of the environmental impact of factory
farms and in an industrial agriculture
but there's also a very significant harm
that comes to the public health from the
practices of industrial agriculture
you've been inside numerous factory
farms as part of your work with DXE so
talk if you could about what it is that
you've seen and what it is that you've
learned about the relationship between
this industry and and public health
harms I think you're definitely right
that as these issues are getting closer
to home because we're experiencing the
impacts of them in the environment in
public health the public is paying more
attention to what's happening inside of
animal agriculture facilities and it
just happens that what is best for these
animals and the the best conditions and
the best way to live for them is also
better for our public health concerns
it's better for the environment sickness
and disease are absolutely the norm
inside any facility that is exploiting
animals for profit which typically means
confining them by the thousands by the
tens of thousands in a way where they
are exposed to one another's not just
their own
breath not just breathing on each other
constantly or trampling on each other
constantly but exposed to one another's
feces and urine and this makes them
highly susceptible to both viral and
bacterial infections so what we should
be talking about what this is an
opportunity for us to elevate is
zoonotic disease which is the comment I
hear that even the CDC has said that
three out of four new emerging
infectious diseases are coming from
animals to people and that's what we're
looking at today so I'm really grateful
for the opportunity to talk about this
because I have seen like you said I've
been investigating factory farms with
direct action everywhere for four years
now and I have seen these animals and
seen them sick seen them panting and
struggling to breathe right in front of
me I've been inside of pig farms in
North Carolina and a DXE investigation
of Smithfield the largest pork producer
in the world I've seen mother pigs with
these tennis ball-sized abscesses on
their bodies and in many cases the they
build up and the pressure builds up to
the point that they pop and so you see a
lot of open abscesses as well and just
pus and blood and all kinds of
secretions mixing with the feces and the
yarn in these facilities and creating
the perfect breeding pot for future
diseases like Ovid 19 yeah you know I
think one of the things important that's
important to underscore is that you
yourself have witnessed all of these
conditions you're describing firsthand
through your work with the oxy of having
gone into these facilities filmed it
without authorization done in great
public service by bringing attention to
the practices taking place there's laws
that have been passed as a result of
these industries control or lobbyists in
and the state legislatures in which they
reside and into essentially criminalize
the the filming or people getting jobs
with the intention of publicizing called
Agra Gaza because they know that the
practices that are there are so
repulsive morally ethically but also in
terms of the public help that this
industry can only survive if if much
like the war machine or
Tyrael ISM if they hide the truth of
what it is they're really doing so I
think it's important to note first of
all that you yourself have seen what
you're describing firsthand in these
industries in these factories but also
you know Cory Booker who is a pretty
controversial figure on the Left and and
in lots of circles for a while was a
vegan but he's a really committed animal
rights activist and one of the points he
makes is that the communities in which
this waste is often being dumped is
disproportionately affecting poor
communities and racial minorities that's
why are these companies these
corporations dump all the sludge and all
this waste and all this fecal matter
that's likely infected beyond that these
are not animals being naturally raised
in some organic setting they're being
genetically altered and mutated to be
enormous to be incredibly unhealthy we
don't even know what the ultimate
effects are in and that's really what
interests me a lot is there's a lot of
talk in the West about in this very kind
of judgmental way about the animal
consumption and agricultural practices
in China people consuming dogs or bats
or snakes there's definitely been an
uptick in that kind of a discourse over
the last three months because of the
attempt to blame China for the corona
virus how does that compare what we
think about China in terms of their on
hygienic practices when it comes to
animals with what you've seen as part of
these investigations with the US or
other Western countries industrial
agricultural practices I would ask
anybody who is pointing the finger at
these practices in China if they've been
inside of a factory farm in the United
States because if you've walked inside
one of these places and you've been hit
in the face with this stench and looked
around you and seen diarrhea everywhere
and in the midst of a moment in North
Carolina just a few years ago where
porcine epidemic diarrhea virus was an
endemic issue and the world was talking
about it at least in in the pork
industry quote-unquote and seen actual
signs all around the facility what like
we did warning PEDV porcine epidemic
diarrhea virus warning you know because
that was a disease at that time that was
going around pig farms in over 30 states
in the u.s. that was causing nearly a
100% fatality rate in piglets because
you know not to be too graphic but what
that causes you can guess from the name
is just incredibly severe watery
diarrhea which in turn leads to
dehydration and so in bigger pigs who
can lose that weight they would just get
sick but in piglets it was basically
certain death and so farms in the United
States were terrified of that entering
their facilities and that's a major
reason that farms practice biosecurity
or say that they do and encourage their
employees to but we've actually
consulted with veterinarians about the
biosecurity measures that we take to get
them approved and to always stay up to
date on the latest research and we take
far more biosecurity precautions than
what we've actually witnessed employees
taking and so there's this major threat
even at the time that it's going around
a few years ago that it's not actually
it's not actually changing what's
happening that the answer to this
question is not what can we do to stop
the root cause of these issues it's just
to blame others and to keep it out of
the media spotlight and so in an issue
or in a moment right now we're kovat 19
is on everyone's mind we see the same
thing it's being called the China
Chinese virus and it's a you know it's
it's about wet markets it's about bats
it's about wild animals but there's so
many infectious diseases throughout
history where we could be talking about
factory farms I mean swine flu pandemic
of 2009 all kinds of avian flu
there's there's AI havean flu right now
h5n1 that has a 60% fatality rate in
human beings and right now it hasn't
mutated to be easily infect infectious
to human beings so there have been some
cases in humans but it's not a
full-blown pandemic fortunately but how
long are we going to wait for that to
happen because when we're seeing enough
destruction as we are right now with
kovat 19 which has a fatality rate in
the
Ingle digits how can we know which
experts do that there is this other
disease out there that has a 60%
fatality rate in human beings that all
we can do right now and all we're doing
right now is to try to prepare a vaccine
for when that eventually might reach a
pandemic State yeah you know I think
that one of the focal points people's
thought process over the past three
months is this pandemic and the horrific
reality of it has begun to sunk in
altering all of our lives in radical and
previously unthinkable ways is to begin
to wonder what is it about our practices
as a species as a planet as as this kind
of advanced technological modern society
that is causing the earth to revolt in
in in in ways that can be apocalyptic
whether its climate change or the
appearance of antibiotic resistant
infections and bacterial or pandemics of
this type and we think a lot about
flying and airplanes and dependence on
fossil fuels but clearly the way that
we're consuming food and feeding a
planet of over 7 billion people through
mass industrial agriculture was there's
nothing to do with family farms a little
own more organic bucolic imagery of the
kind this industry likes to promote is
obviously something that has changed
fundamentally and in the way that we
treat the planet we treat our bodies we
treat the ecosystem obviously if you're
a human being and you want to avoid that
one way is to simply refuse to eat meat
to eat products that are derived from
animals and only to eat food that comes
from plants but for people who aren't
prepared to or interested in or willing
to right now at least do that full vegan
solution what alternatives are there for
people who want to avoid supporting an
industry that has such devastating
impacts on our communities and on our
public health is it to look for more
humane
treatment of animals on the part of
specific companies or genuinely organic
food is there other kinds of food or
ways of consuming food that is healthier
what do you have to say to people who
are now concerned more so than ever
before and one alter their behavior but
aren't necessarily ready to go the full
route of becoming vegans the fact is
there is so little information out there
for people who want to make informed
decisions when it comes to antibiotic
usage and the kinds of disease that are
present in these factory farms and to
give you one specific example
in the North Carolina Smithfield
investigation we found entire rooms full
of antibiotics important drugs for human
health things that could be used to
treat human meningitis human malaria all
these other infections that humans can
experience and we also found the use of
carbon docks which is actually a known
carcinogen it's a drug that's been
banned already in Australia and Canada
and in the entire European Union and the
FDA actually warns warns the public
about it on their website but if you
read the FAQ if you're one of those
concerned consumers who decides I don't
want carbon DOCSIS carcinogenic
antibiotic being put into my body how do
I know what products to buy how do I
know what facilities not to buy from you
can go to the FDA's website and their
FAQ will tell you we can't actually tell
you what facilities are using carbon
docs even though we advise against it
because they these companies aren't
required to report what antibiotics they
use yeah yeah so I should say you know
in the course of having done reporting
on Smithfield in conjunction with DXE
investigations and other animal rights
groups whistleblowers and the like
Smithfield insists that they use the
most modern means of sanitary conditions
and biosecurity and hygiene in their
facilities they have committed at least
by words and on paper to introducing
reforms of the kind mandated by the EU
that's not yet mandated in the e in the
US of in terms of giving animals more
space so they're not necessarily right
on top of each other but anyone can go
in
get videos not just a Smithfield but of
almost every single large industrial
agriculture corporation and factory farm
and draw your own conclusions about
whether the way in which animals are
being caged and treated in order to feed
huge numbers of people for profit is
anything remotely approaching sanitary
natural hygienic or or healthy and I do
think that now that we're in the middle
of a pandemic people are gonna start
paying a lot more attention to the
relationship between this industry which
goes almost entirely unregulated and not
just the ethics of torturing animals or
the the deleterious effect on the
environment and global warming from
deforestation to for cattle and and
methane emissions from this industry but
also on the public health on the kind of
festering disease that exists in many of
these these factory farms well what we
need to do is to pressure our government
leaders to acknowledge this link because
experts you know scientific experts
already have the United Nations already
has issued a report saying we have no
time to wait that there by the report
last year actually says that by the year
2050 antibiotic resistant pathogens are
expected to kill ten million people
annually and our government's not even
talking about it in any substantive way
and that's a major failing in our
response to this virus right now because
we're doing nothing to prepare ourselves
for the next one not only are we running
out of masks and running out of supplies
we're not thinking about the root cause
and what needs to be done to address
animal exploitation yeah so Cassie let
me thank you not only for taking the
time to talk to me about this incredibly
important matter but also for your work
and and the work of
your colleagues at DXE a lot of you end
up including you facing criminal
prosecution and criminal charges for
what the state regards is the crime of
entering these facilities either to
rescue animals from these torturous
conditions or simply to document what's
taking place in these corporations that
are responsible for our food supply so
you're doing incredibly courageous work
I know that you face criminal charges
and I believe are continuing to face
criminal charges so thank you for that
work keep up the great work and and
thanks for taking the time to talk to me
as well I really appreciate it thank you
glad I'm facing eight felony charges
here in California courts being delayed
so we'll have to see what happens but
that's certainly not going to stop us
from continuing to expose among other
things Ryo virus and other infections
right here in California I have no doubt
that it won't thanks again Cassie really
appreciate it thank you
[Music]